---
layout: post
title: "SL1 : Hypothesis Testing ~ A/B Experiments"
date: 2021-12-1
excerpt: A hypothesis in a scientific setting is constructed as to statements, the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis to which we shall seek to disprove the former.
---

Increasingly, machine learning models are used to automate decision-making in a plethora of domains. It has found its utility in understanding consumer behavour to improve service offers such as what discounts should be offered to an online customer and consumer experience and also toher important decisions that vastly impact people's lives. Most of these decisions require the interpretation of causal relationships from data and the thinking of the counterfactuals. Relying on classc machine learning that is based on correlation pattern recognition is not going to get us far with robust predictions and relaible decision-making.

The following steps are outlined for hypothesis testing. Data is continuous and data is based on a normal distribution.


(A)Declare your null hypothesis (Ho)

(B)Declare your alternative hypothesis (Ha)

(C)State your assumptions about your dataset

(D)Set your significance level(alpha α) 

(E)Choose your test and Conduct your experiment

(F)Record observations/results

(G)Compute probability of your results

(H)Make a decision based on your p-value

A/B experiments are an experimental methodology example of statistical hypothesis testing. There are two groups, primarily the test and control to which the product has been tested and the results are then compared to check if it is practical and statistically significant.
