---
layout: post
title: "ABI4 : Rebuilding Foundations ~ Data Governance"
date: 2023-06-15
excerpt: Recognizing value creation in data governance can be challenging, let alone effectively scaling it and linking efforts to prioritize potential analytics use-cases. It calls for a mindset shift from thinking of policies and frameworks to one where business leadership strategically links them to digital transformation efforts. In this blog, i examine how businesses need a fresh think on data governance ideas towards an effective implementation of data governance strategy. 
---

Data governance often focuses on data quality, data security and access and data lifecycle management. With the release of the General Data Protection Regulation in view of rising concerns on the lack of data quality and privacy breaches arising from poorly governed data production and exchange , Establishing a governance model is often conditional upon the business maturity and sophistication of an organization. Highly regulated industries will often have the most robust and comprehensive data governance model as data regulations require additional controls and reporting. Hence the opportunity for metadata automation and data masking for privacy controls whether in exploration mode or broader customer setting will need to be strongly enforced. 

From a broad perspective data governance can be viewed from a series of stages. The most basic level starts with information profiling which involves data quality and lineage and proveanance. It might also involve data inventory and analysis. Next, is about privacy and security. Examples include information sensitivity classification, privacy management and role-based access controls. Compliance would include the regulatory aspect, corporate IT policices and procedures. The last stage is about creating awareness through employee training and engagement and having visibility.

Data is processed in siloed and not shared between departments. This means there is a lack of accountability and responsibility for data related issues and a subsequent  lack of visibility to mitigate the potential risks

When data becomes obsolete, its value to return actionable insights decreases. Data goverannce aims to improve the following attributes :

Availability
Usability
Integrity
Security

Model governance sets the context around how organizations implement and operate machine learning in production while balancing efficiencies and achieving more with their AI investments. With improved governance comes improved data quality, stronger security and better decision making
